Raw Text of “Speech and Language Processing” by Jurafsky & Martin (12/30/2020 Draft)

Chapter 3: N-gram Language Models

3.0    Introduction
Predicting  is difficult—especially about  the future, as the old quip goes.  But  how about predicting something that seems much easier, like the next few words someone is going to say? What word, for example, is likely to follow Please turn your homework … Hopefully,  most  of  you  concluded  that a very  likely  word  is  in, or  possibly  over, but  probably  not  refrigerator  or  the.   In  the  following  sections  we  will formalize this intuition by introducing  models that assign a probability  to each possible next word. The same models will also serve to assign a probability  to an entire sentence. Such  a model,  for example, could  predict  that the following  sequence  has a much higher probability of appearing in a text: “all of  a  sudden  I  notice  three  guys  standing  on  the   sidewalk” than does this same set of words in a different order: “on  guys  all    I  of  notice  sidewalk   three  a  sudden  standing   the” Why would you want to predict upcoming words, or assign probabilities  to sentences?  Probabilities are essential in any task in which we have to identify  words in noisy, ambiguous input, like speech recognition.  For a speech recognizer  to realize that you said “I will be back soonish” and not “I will be bassoon dish”, it helps to know that back soonish is a much more probable sequence than bassoon dish. For writing tools like spelling correction or grammatical error correction,  we need to find and correct errors in writing like “Their are two midterms”, in which “There” was mistyped as “Their”, or “Everything has improve”, in which “improve” should have been “improved”. The phrase “There are” will be much more probable than “Their are”, and “has improved” than “has improve”, allowing us to help users by detecting and correcting these errors. Assigning probabilities to sequences of words is also essential in machine translation. Suppose we are translating a Chinese source sentence. As part of  the process  we might have built the following set of  potential rough English translations: he introduced reporters to the main contents of the statement, he briefed to reporters the main contents of the statement, he briefed reporters on the main contents of the statement. A probabilistic model of word sequences could suggest that briefed reporters on is a more probable English phrase than briefed to reporters (which has an awkward “to” after “briefed”)  or  introduced reporters  to  (which  uses  a  verb  that  is  less  fluent English in this context), allowing us to correctly select the boldfaced sentence above. Probabilities  are  also important  for augmentative  and alternative  communication  systems  (Trnka et al. 2007,  Kane et al. 2017).  People often  use such AAC devices if they are physically unable to speak or sign but can instead use eye gaze or other specific movements  to select words from a menu to be spoken by the system. Word prediction can be used to suggest likely words for the menu. Models that assign probabilities to sequences of words are called language models or LMs.  In this chapter  we introduce  the simplest model  that assigns  probabilities  to sentences  and  sequences  of  words,  the n-gram.   An  n-gram  is a sequence of  n  words:  a 2-gram  (which  we'll call bigram)  is a two-word  sequence  of  words like “please turn",  “turn  your",  or "your  homework",  and  a 3-gram  (a trigram)  is a three-word  sequence of  words like “please turn  your", or “turn  your homework". We'll see how to use n-gram models  to estimate the probability  of the last word of an  n-gram  given  the  previous  words,  and  also  to assign  probabilities  to entire  sequences. In a bit of  terminological ambiguity,  we usually  drop the word  “model", and use the term n-gram (and bigram, etc.)  to mean either  the word sequence itself or the predictive model that assigns it a probability.  In later chapters we'll introduce more sophisticated language models like the RNN LMs of Chapter 9.

3.1    N-Grams
Let's  begin  with  the  task  of  computing  P(w|h), the  probability  of  a  word  w given some history  h.  Suppose the history  h is “its  water is so transparent  that”  and  we want to know the probability  that the next word is the. One way  to estimate  this  probability  is from relative  frequency  counts:  take a very large corpus, count the number of times we see “its water is so transparent that”, and count the number of times “this” is followed by “the”. This would be answering the question “Out of the times we saw the history h, how many times was it followed by the word  w”. With a large enough  corpus, such as the web, we can compute these counts and estimate  the probability  from Eq. 3.2.  You  should  pause  now,  go to the web,  and compute  this estimate for yourself. While this method of estimating  probabilities directly from counts works fine in many cases, it turns out that even the web isn't big enough to give us good estimates in most cases. This is because language is creative; new sentences are created all the time, and we won't always be able to count entire sentences.  Even simple extensions of  the  example  sentence  may  have  counts  of  zero  on  the  web  (such  as “Walden Pond's water is so transparent that the”, well, used to have counts of zero). Similarly,  if  we wanted  to  know  the joint  probability  of  an entire  sequence  of words like “its water is so transparent”, we could do it by asking “out of all possible sequences  of  five words,  how  many  of  them  are “its  water  is  so transparent?”  We would have to get the count of “its water is so transparent and divide by the sum of the counts of all possible five word sequences.  That seems rather a lot to estimate! For this reason, we’ll need to introduce more clever ways of estimating the probability of a word w given a history h, or the probability  of an entire word sequence W.   Let's  start  with  a  little  formalizing  of  notation.   To  represent  the  probability of  a particular  random  variable X,  taking  on the value  “the”,  or P(Xi=“the”),  we will use the simplification P(the).  We’ll represent a sequence of N words either as w1...wn or w1:n (so the expression w1:n-1 means the string w1, w2, …, wn-1). For the joint probability of each word in a sequence having a particular value P(X=w1, Y=w2, Z=w3,..., W=wn) we’ll use P(w1, w2, ...,wn). Now how can we compute probabilities of entire sequences like P(w1, w2, ...,wn)? One thing we can do is decompose  this probability  using the chain rule of probability. The chain rule shows the link between computing the joint probability of a sequence and computing the conditional  probability  of  a word given  previous  words.  Equation 3.4 suggests that we could estimate the joint probability of an entire sequence of words by multiplying  together  a number of conditional  probabilities.  But using the chain rule doesn't really  seem to help us! We don't know any  way to compute  the exact probability of a word given a long sequence of preceding words. As we said above, we can't just estimate by counting the number of times every word occurs following every long string,  because language is creative and any particular context might have never occurred before! The intuition of the n-gram model is that instead of computing the probability of a word given its entire history, we can approximate the history by just the last few words. The bigram model, for example,  approximates  the probability  of a word given all the previous words P(wn|w1:n-1) by using only the conditional probability of the preceding word P(wn|wn-1). In other words, instead of computing the probability P(the|Walden  Pond's water is so transparent  that) we approximate it with the probability P(the|that). When we use a bigram model to predict the conditional probability of the next word, we are thus making the following approximation: P(wn|w1:n-1) = P(wn|wn-1). The assumption that the probability of a word depends only on the previous word is called a Markov assumption.  Markov  models are the class of probabilistic  models that assume we can predict the probability  of some future unit without looking  too far into the past. We can generalize the bigram (which looks one word into the past) to the trigram (which looks two words into the past) and thus to the n-gram (which looks n-1 words into the past). Thus,  the  general  equation  for  this  n-gram  approximation  to  the  conditional probability of the next word in a sequence is (3.8). Given the bigram assumption for the probability of an individual word, we can compute the probability of a complete word sequence by substituting Eq. 3.7 into Eq. 3.4: (3.9). How do we estimate these bigram or n-gram probabilities?  An intuitive  way to estimate probabilities  is called maximum  likelihood  estimation  or MLE.  We get the MLE estimate for the parameters of an n-gram model  by getting counts from a corpus, and normalizing the counts so that they lie between 0 and  1. For  example,  to  compute  a  particular  bigram  probability  of  a  word  y  given  a previous word x, we’ll compute the count of the bigram C(xy) and normalize by the sum of all the bigrams that share the same first word x: (3.10). We can simplify this equation, since the sum of all bigram counts that start with a given word wn-1  must be equal to the unigram count for that word wn-1  (the reader should take a moment to be convinced  of this): (3.11). Let's  work  through  an example  using  a mini-corpus  of  three sentences.   We'll first  need  to  augment  each  sentence  with  a  special  symbol  <s> at  the beginning of  the sentence,  to give  us  the bigram context  of  the first  word.  We’ll also need  a special end-symbol </s>. Here are the calculations for some of the bigram probabilities from this corpus. For the general case of MLE n-gram parameter estimation: (3.12). Equation  3.12 (like Eq. 3.11) estimates  the n-gram  probability  by dividing  the observed frequency  of a particular sequence  by the observed frequency  of  a prefix. This  ratio is called a relative  frequency.   We  said  above  that  this  use  of  relative frequencies as a way to estimate probabilities is an example of maximum likelihood estimation  or MLE.  In MLE,  the resulting  parameter  set maximizes  the likelihood of  the training  set T  given  the model  M (i.e.,  P(T  M)).  For example,  suppose  the word Chinese occurs 400 times in a corpus of a million words like the Brown corpus. What is the  probability  that a random  word  selected  from some other  text of, say, a million  words  will  be  the  word  Chinese?   The MLE of  its  probability  is  400 or .0004.  Now  .0004 is not the best possible estimate of the probability  of Chinese occurring  in  all  situations;  it  might  turn  out  that  in  some  other  corpus  or  context Chinese  is a very  unlikely  word.  But it is the  probability  that makes it most likely that  Chinese  will occur  400  times  in  a  million-word  corpus.   We  present  ways  to modify the MLE estimates slightly to get better probability estimates in Section 3.4. Let's move on to some examples from a slightly larger corpus than our 14-word example  above.  We'll  use data from the now-defunct  Berkeley  Restaurant  Project, a dialogue  system  from  the last century  that  answered  questions  about  a database of  restaurants  in  Berkeley,  California  (Jurafsky  et al.,  1994). Figure 3.1 shows the bigram counts from a piece of a bigram grammar from the Berkeley  Restaurant  Project.  Note that the majority  of  the values are zero.  In fact, we have chosen the sample words to cohere with each other; a matrix selected from a random set of seven words would be even more sparse. Figure 3.2 shows the bigram probabilities after normalization  (dividing each cell in Fig. 3.1 by the appropriate  unigram for its row,  taken  from  the following  set of unigram probabilities). Now  we can compute  the probability  of  sentences  like  I  want  English  food  or I want Chinese  food by simply  multiplying  the appropriate  bigram probabilities  together. We leave it as Exercise 3.2 to compute the probability of “i want chinese food”. What  kinds  of  linguistic  phenomena  are  captured  in  these  bigram  statistics? Some of the bigram probabilities above encode some facts that we think of as strictly syntactic in nature, like the fact that  what comes  after eat is  usually  a noun  or an adjective, or that what comes after “to” is usually a verb. Others might be a fact about the  personal  assistant  task,  like  the high  probability  of  sentences  beginning  with the words I. And some might even be cultural rather than linguistic,  like the higher probability that people are looking for Chinese versus English food. Some practical issues:    Although for pedagogical purposes we have only described bigram  models, in  practice it's  more common  to use trigram  models,  which  condition on the previous two words rather than the previous word, or 4-gram or even 5-gram models,  when  there is sufficient  training data.  Note that for these larger n-grams, we'll need to assume extra contexts to the left and right of the sentence end. For example, to compute trigram probabilities at the very beginning of the sentence, we use two pseudo-words for the first trigram (i.e., P(I|<s><s>). We  always  represent  and  compute  language  model  probabilities  in  log format as log probabilities.   Since   probabilities  are  (by  definition)  less  than  or equal  to 1,  the  more  probabilities  we  multiply  together,  the  smaller  the  product  becomes. Multiplying enough n-grams together would result in numerical underflow.  By using log probabilities instead of raw probabilities, we get numbers that are not as small. Adding in log space is equivalent  to multiplying  in linear space, so we combine log probabilities by adding them. The result of doing all computation and storage in log space  is that  we only  need  to  convert  back  into  probabilities  if  we  need  to  report them at the end; then we can just take the exp of the logprob.

3.2    Evaluating Language Models
The  best  way  to evaluate  the  performance  of  a  language  model  is  to embed  it  in an application  and  measure  how  much  the application  improves.  Such end-to-end evaluation  is called  extrinsic  evaluation.   Extrinsic  evaluation  is the only  way  to know  if  a particular  improvement  in  a component  is really  going  to  help  the  task at  hand.   Thus,  for  speech  recognition,  we  can  compare  the  performance  of  two language models  by running the speech recognizer  twice, once with each language model, and seeing which gives the more accurate transcription. Unfortunately, running big NLP systems end-to-end is often very expensive.  Instead, it would be nice to have a metric that can be used to quickly evaluate potential improvements  in a language model.  An intrinsic evaluation metric is one that measures the quality of a model independent of any application. For an intrinsic evaluation of a language model we need a test set. As with many of the statistical models in our field, the probabilities of an n-gram model come from the corpus it is trained on, the training set or training corpus. We can then measure the quality of  an n-gram  model  by its performance on some unseen  data called the test set or test corpus.  We will also sometimes call test sets and other datasets that  are  not  in  our  training  sets  held  out  corpora  because  we  hold  them  out from  the training data. So if  we are given  a corpus  of  text  and  want  to compare  two different  n-gram models,  we divide the data into training  and  test sets,  train  the parameters  of  both models on the training set, and then compare how well the two trained models fit the test set. But  what  does it  mean  to  “fit  the  test  set”?  The answer  is  simple:  whichever model  assigns  a  higher  probability  to  the  test  set—meaning  it  more  accurately predicts  the test set—is a better model.  Given  two probabilistic  models,  the better model is the one that has a tighter fit to the test data or that better predicts the details of  the test data, and hence will assign a higher probability to the test data. Since our evaluation  metric is based on test set probability, it's important  not to let  the test sentences  into  the  training  set.  Suppose  we  are  trying  to compute  the probability  of a particular “test” sentence.  If our test sentence is part of the training corpus,  we will mistakenly  assign it an artificially  high  probability  when it occurs in  the test set.  We call this situation  training  on the test set.  Training  on  the test set introduces  a bias that makes the probabilities all look too high, and causes huge inaccuracies in perplexity,  the probability-based metric we introduce below. Sometimes  we  use  a  particular  test  set  so  often  that  we  implicitly  tune  to  its characteristics.  We then need a fresh test set that is truly unseen.  In such cases,  we call  the initial  test set the development  test  set or, devset.  How  do we divide our data into training,  development,  and  test sets?  We want our test set to be as large as possible, since a small test set may be accidentally  unrepresentative, but we also want  as  much  training  data  as  possible.  At the minimum,  we  would  want  to pick the smallest test set that gives us enough statistical power to measure a statistically significant difference between two potential models. In practice, we often just divide our data into 80%  training,  10% development,  and  10%  test.  Given  a large corpus that we want to divide into training and test, test data can either be taken from some continuous  sequence of  text inside the corpus, or we can remove smaller  “stripes” of text from randomly selected parts of our corpus and combine them into a test set.

3.2.1    Perplexity
In practice we don't use raw probability  as our metric for evaluating language models, but a variant called perplexity.  The perplexity (sometimes called PP for short) of a language model on a test set is the inverse probability of the test set, normalized by the number of words.  For a test set W = w1w2...wN: (3.14). We can use the chain rule to expand the probability of W: (3.15). Thus,  if  we are computing  the perplexity  of  W  with  a bigram language model, we get: (3.16). Note that because of the inverse in Eq. 3.15, the higher the conditional probability of  the word sequence,  the lower the perplexity.  Thus,  minimizing  perplexity  is equivalent  to maximizing  the test set probability  according  to the language model. What  we generally  use for word sequence in Eq. 3.15 or Eq. 3.16 is the entire sequence  of  words  in  some  test  set.   Since  this  sequence  will  cross  many  sentence boundaries,  we need to include the begin- and end-sentence markers <s> and </s> in the probability computation.  We also need to include the end-of-sentence marker </s> (but not the beginning-of-sentence marker <s>) in the total count of  word tokens N. There is another way to think about perplexity: as the weighted average branching factor of a language.  The branching factor of a language is the number of possible next words that can follow any word. Consider the task of recognizing the digits in English (zero, one, two,..., nine), given that (both in some training set and in some test set) each of the 10 digits occurs with equal probability P 0.1. The perplexity of this mini-language is in fact 10. To see that, imagine a test string of digits of length N, and assume that in the training set all the digits occurred with equal  probability. By Eq. 3.15, the perplexity  will be (3.17). But suppose  that  the number  zero is really frequent  and  occurs far more often than  other  numbers.   Let's  say  that  0 occurs  91  times  in  the  training  set,  and  each of  the other  digits  occurred  1 time each.   Now  we  see  the following  test  set:  0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0.  We should  expect  the  perplexity  of  this  test  set to be lower  since most  of  the time the next  number  will  be  zero,  which is very  predictable,  i.e.  has a high probability.  Thus, although  the branching factor is still 10, the perplexity or weighted  branching factor is smaller. We leave this exact calculation as exercise 12. We see in Section 3.7 that perplexity  is also closely  related  to the information-theoretic notion of entropy. Finally, let's look at an example of how perplexity  can be used to compare different  n-gram models.   We  trained  unigram,  bigram,  and  trigram  grammars  on  38 million words (including start-of-sentence tokens) from the Wall Street Journal, using a 19,979  word  vocabulary.   We then computed  the perplexity  of  each of  these models on a test set of 1.5 million  words with Eq. 3.16.  The table below shows the perplexity of a 1.5 million word WSJ test set according to each of these grammars. As  we  see  above,  the  more  information  the  n-gram  gives  us  about  the  word sequence, the lower  the perplexity  (since  as Eq. 3.15 showed,  perplexity  is related inversely  to the likelihood of the test sequence according to the model). Note  that  in computing  perplexities,  the  n-gram  model  P  must  be constructed without  any knowledge of  the test set or any prior knowledge of  the vocabulary  of the  test  set.  Any  kind of  knowledge  of  the test  set can cause  the  perplexity  to be artificially  low.  The perplexity  of  two language models  is only  comparable  if  they use identical vocabularies. An  (intrinsic)  improvement  in  perplexity  does  not guarantee  an (extrinsic)  improvement in the performance of a language processing  task like speech recognition or machine  translation. Nonetheless,  because perplexity  often correlates  with such improvements,  it is commonly used as a quick check on an algorithm.  But a model's improvement in perplexity  should always be confirmed by an end-to-end evaluation of a real task before concluding the evaluation of the model.

3.3    Generalization and Zeros
The n-gram model, like many statistical models, is dependent on the training corpus. One implication  of  this is that  the probabilities  often encode specific  facts about a given training corpus. Another implication  is that n-grams do a better and better job of modeling the training corpus as we increase the value of N. We  can  visualize  both  of  these  facts  by  borrowing  the  technique  of  Shannon (1951)  and  Miller  and  Selfridge  (1950) of  generating  random  sentences  from different  n-gram  models. It's  simplest  to  visualize  how  this  works  for  the  unigram case.  Imagine all the words of the English language covering  the probability  space between  0 and 1, each word covering  an interval  proportional  to its frequency.  We choose a random value between 0 and 1 and print the word whose interval includes this  chosen  value.   We  continue  choosing  random  numbers  and  generating  words until  we randomly  generate  the  sentence-final token  </s>.   We  can  use  the same technique  to generate  bigrams  by first generating  a random bigram that starts  with <s> (according to its bigram probability).  Let's say the second word of that bigram is w. We next chose a random bigram starting with w (again, drawn according to its bigram probability), and so on. To give an intuition for the increasing  power of  higher-order  n-grams,  Fig. 3.3 shows  random  sentences  generated  from  unigram,  bigram,  trigram,  and  4-gram models trained on Shakespeare's  works. The longer the context on which we train the model, the more coherent  the sentences.  In the unigram sentences, there is no coherent relation between words or any sentence-final  punctuation. The  bigram  sentences  have  some  local  word-to-word coherence  (especially  if  we consider  that  punctuation  counts  as a  word). The  tri-gram and 4-gram sentences  are beginning to look a lot like Shakespeare.  Indeed, a careful investigation of the 4-gram sentences shows  that they look a little too much like Shakespeare.  The words “It cannot be but so” are directly from “King John”. This is because, not to put the knock on Shakespeare, his oeuvre is not very large as corpora go (N = 884,647, V = 29,066), and our n-gram probability matrices are ridiculously sparse. There are V^2 =  844,000,000 possible bigrams alone, and the number of possible 4-grams is V^4 = 7x10^17. Thus, once the generator has chosen the first 4-gram (It cannot  be but), there  are only five possible continuations  (that, I, he, thou, and so); indeed, for many 4-grams, there is only one continuation. To get an idea of the dependence of a grammar on its training set, let's look at an n-gram  grammar trained  on a completely  different  corpus:  the Wall  Street  Journal (WSJ)  newspaper. Shakespeare  and  the Wall  Street  Journal  are  both  English,  so we  might  expect  some  overlap  between  our  n-grams  for  the  two  genres.   Fig. 3.4 shows  sentences  generated  by  unigram,  bigram,  and  trigram  grammars  trained  on 40 million words from WSJ. Compare these examples to the pseudo-Shakespeare in Fig. 3.3. While they both model  “English-like sentences”,  there is clearly  no overlap in generated  sentences, and little overlap even in small phrases. Statistical models are likely to be pretty useless as predictors if the training sets and the test sets are as different as Shakespeare and WSJ. How should we deal with this problem when we build n-gram models?  One step is to be sure to use a training corpus that has a similar genre to whatever task we are trying  to accomplish. To  build a language  model  for  translating  legal  documents, we  need  a  training  corpus  of  legal  documents.   To  build  a  language  model  for  a question-answering system, we need a training corpus of questions. It is equally important  to get training data in the appropriate dialect or variety, especially  when  processing  social  media  posts or spoken  transcripts.  For example some  tweets  will  use features  of  African  American  Language  (AAL)—  the  name for the many  variations of language used in African  American  communities  (King, 2020).  Such features include words like finna—an auxiliary  verb that marks immediate future tense —that don't occur in other varieties, or spellings like den for then, in tweets like this one (Blodgett and O’Connor, 2017): (3.18)  Bored af den my phone finna die!!! while tweets from varieties  like Nigerian  English  have markedly  different vocabulary and n-gram patterns from American English (Jurgens et al., 2017): (3.19) @username R u a wizard or wat gan sef: in d mornin - u tweet, afternoon - u tweet, nyt gan u dey tweet.  beta get ur IT placement wiv twitter. Matching  genres  and  dialects  is  still  not  sufficient.   Our  models  may  still  be subject to the problem of sparsity.  For any n-gram that occurred a sufficient number of times, we might have a good estimate of its probability.  But because any corpus is limited, some perfectly acceptable English word sequences are bound to be missing from it.  That is, we'll have many cases of  putative “zero probability  n-grams”  that should  really  have  some  non-zero  probability. Consider  the  words  that follow  the bigram “denied the” in the WSJ Treebank corpus, together with their counts. Suppose our test set has phrases like: denied the offer or denied the loan. Our model will incorrectly estimate that the P(offer|denied the) is 0! These  zeros—things  that  don't  ever  occur  in  the  training  set  but  do  occur  in the test  set—are  a  problem  for  two  reasons.   First,  their  presence  means  we  are underestimating the  probability  of  all  sorts  of  words  that  might  occur,  which  will hurt the performance of any application we want to run on this data. Second, if the probability  of any word in the test set is 0, the entire probability of the test set is 0. By definition, perplexity is based on the inverse probability of the test set.  Thus if some  words have zero probability,  we can't compute  perplexity  at all, since we can't divide by 0!

3.3.1    Unknown Words
The previous  section  discussed  the problem  of  words  whose  bigram  probability  is zero. But what about words we simply have never seen before? Sometimes we have a language task in which this can't happen because we know all the words  that can  occur.  In such a closed  vocabulary  system  the test  set can only contain words from this lexicon, and there will be no unknown  words.  This is a reasonable  assumption  in some domains, such as speech  recognition  or machine translation,  where we have a pronunciation dictionary or a phrase table that are fixed in advance,  and so the language model can only use the words in that dictionary  or phrase table. In other cases we have to deal with words we haven't seen before, which we'll call unknown words, or out of vocabulary (OOV) words.  The percentage of OOV words that appear in the test set is called the OOV rate.  An open vocabulary system is one in which we model these potential unknown words in the test set by adding a pseudo-word  called <UNK>. There  are  two  common  ways  to  train  the  probabilities  of  the  unknown  word model <UNK>. The first one is to turn the problem back into a closed vocabulary  one by choosing a fixed vocabulary in advance: First, choose a vocabulary (word list) that is fixed in advance, Then convert in the training set any word that is not in this set (any OOV word) to the unknown word token <UNK> in a text normalization  step. Finally, estimate the probabilities for <UNK> from its counts just like any other regular word in the training set. The second alternative,  in situations  where we don't have a prior vocabulary  in advance, is to create such a vocabulary implicitly, replacing words in the training data by <UNK> based on their frequency.  For example we can replace by <UNK> all words that occur fewer  than  n times in the training set, where n is some small  number, or equivalently  select a vocabulary  size V in advance (say 50,000) and choose the top V words by frequency and replace the rest by UNK. In either case we then proceed to train the language model as before, treating <UNK> like a regular word. The exact choice of <UNK>  model does have an effect on metrics like perplexity. A language model can achieve low  perplexity  by choosing  a small  vocabulary  and assigning the unknown word a high probability.  For this reason, perplexities should only be compared  across language models  with the same vocabularies (Buck et al., 2014).

3.4    Smoothing
What do we do with words that are in our vocabulary (they are not unknown words) but appear in a test set in an unseen context  (for example they  appear after a word they  never  appeared  after in  training)?   To keep a language  model  from  assigning zero probability  to these unseen  events,  we’ll have to shave off  a bit of  probability mass from  some  more frequent  events  and give it to  the events  we've  never  seen. This modification  is called smoothing  or discounting.  In  this section  and  the following ones we'll introduce a variety of ways to do smoothing:  Laplace (add-one) smoothing, add-k smoothing, stupid backoff, and Kneser-Ney smoothing.

3.4.1    Laplace Smoothing
The  simplest  way  to do  smoothing  is to  add  one  to  all  the  bigram  counts,  before we normalize  them into probabilities.  All the counts  that used to be zero will  now have  a count  of  1,  the counts  of  1 will  be 2,  and  so  on.  This  algorithm  is called Laplace smoothing. Laplace smoothing does not perform  well enough to be used in modern  n-gram  models,  but it usefully  introduces  many  of  the concepts  that  we see in  other  smoothing  algorithms,  gives  a useful  baseline,  and  is also  a practical smoothing algorithm for other tasks like text classification (Chapter 4). Let's  start  with the application  of  Laplace  smoothing  to  unigram  probabilities. Recall that the unsmoothed maximum likelihood estimate of the unigram probability of the word W, is its count c; normalized  by the total number of word tokens N. Laplace smoothing merely adds one to each count (hence its alternate name add-one smoothing).  Since there are V words in the vocabulary and each one was incremented,  we  also  need  to  adjust  the denominator  to  take  into  account  the extra  Y observations.  (What happens to our P values if we don't increase the denominator?) Instead  of  changing  both  the  numerator  and  denominator,  it  is  convenient  to describe how a smoothing algorithm  affects the numerator,  by defining an adjusted count c*. This adjusted count is easier to compare directly with the MLE counts and can be turned into a probability  like an MLE count by normalizing by N.  To define this count, since  we are only  changing  the numerator in addition to adding  1 we'll also need to multiply  by a normalization  factor. We can now turn c*  into a probability  P*  by normalizing by N. A related  way  to view  smoothing  is as discounting  (lowering)  some  non-zero counts in order to get the probability  mass that will be assigned to the zero counts. Thus, instead of referring to the discounted counts c*, we might describe a smoothing algorithm  in terms of a relative discount  d  ,  the ratio of the discounted counts to the original counts. Now  that we have the intuition for the unigram case, let's smooth our Berkeley Restaurant  Project bigrams.  Figure 3.5 shows  the add-one smoothed  counts for the bigrams in Fig. 3.1. Figure 3.6 shows the add-one smoothed probabilities for the bigrams in Fig. 3.2. Recall  that  normal  bigram  probabilities  are computed  by  normalizing  each row of counts by the unigram count. For add-one smoothed bigram counts, we need to augment the unigram count by the number of total word types in the vocabulary  V. Thus, each of  the  unigram counts  given in the previous  section  will need  to be augmented by V =  1446. The result is the smoothed bigram probabilities in Fig. 3.6. It is often convenient  to reconstruct the count matrix so we can see how much a smoothing algorithm has changed the original counts. These adjusted counts can be computed  by Eq. 3.24. Figure 3.7 shows the reconstructed counts. Note that add-one smoothing has made a very big change to the counts. C(want to) changed from 609 to 238!  We can see this in probability  space as well:  P(to|want) decreases from .66 in the unsmoothed  case to .26 in the smoothed case.  Looking at the discount d  (the ratio between new and old counts)  shows  us how strikingly  the counts for each prefix word have been reduced; the discount for the bigram want to is .39, while the discount for Chinese  food is .10, a factor of 10! The sharp change in counts and probabilities occurs because too much probability mass is moved to all the zeros.

3.4.2    Add-k smoothing
One alternative  to add-one  smoothing is to move a bit less of  the probability  mass from the seen to the unseen events.  Instead of adding  I  to each count, we add a fractional count k (.5? .05? .01?). This algorithm is therefore called add-k smoothing. Add-k  smoothing  requires  that  we  have  a  method  for  choosing  k,  this  can  be done,  for example,  by  optimizing  on  a devset.  Although  add-k  is useful for some tasks  (including  text  classification),  it  turns  out  that  it  still  doesn't  work  well  for language modeling,  generating  counts  with  poor variances  and often  inappropriate discounts (Gale and Church, 1994).

3.4.3    Backoff and Interpolation
The discounting  we have been discussing so far can help solve the problem  of  zero frequency n-grams.  But there is an additional source of knowledge  we can draw on. If we are trying to compute P but we have no examples of a particular trigram we can  instead  estimate  its  probability  by  using  the bigram probability. Similarly, if we don't have counts to compute the bigram probability, we can look to the unigram probability. In other words, sometimes using less context is a good thing, helping to generalize more for contexts that the model hasn't learned much about. There are two ways to  use  this  n-gram  “hierarchy”.   In  backoff,  we  use  the  trigram  if  the evidence  is sufficient, otherwise  we use the bigram, otherwise the unigram.  In other words, we only “back off” to a lower-order n-gram if we have zero evidence for a higher-order n-gram. By contrast, in interpolation, we always mix the probability estimates from all the n-gram estimators, weighing and combining the trigram, bigram, and unigram counts. In simple linear interpolation, we combine different order n-grams by linearly interpolating all the models. Thus, we estimate the trigram probability by  mixing  together  the  unigram,  bigram,  and  trigram  probabilities, each  weighted by a lambda such that the lambdas sum to 1. In a slightly more sophisticated  version of linear interpolation, each weight is computed by conditioning on the context. This way, if we have particularly accurate counts for a particular  bigram,  we assume that the counts  of the trigrams based on this  bigram  will  be  more  trustworthy,  so  we  can  make  the  lambdas  for  those  trigrams higher  and  thus  give that trigram  more  weight  in the interpolation.  Equation  3.28 shows the equation for interpolation  with context-conditioned weights. How are these Iambda values set? Both the simple interpolation  and conditional interpolation  lambdas are learned from a held-out corpus.  A held-out corpus is an additional training corpus that we use to set hyperparameters like these lambda values, by choosing the lambda values  that  maximize  the likelihood  of  the  held-out  corpus.   That  is,  we fix the n-gram probabilities  and then search for the lambda values that—when  plugged  into Eq. 3.26—give us the highest probability of the held-out set. There are various ways to find  this  optimal  set  of  lambdas.   One  way  is  to  use  the EM  algorithm,  an  iterative learning algorithm that converges on locally optimal lambdas (Jelinek and Mercer, 1980). In a backoff  n-gram model, if the n-gram we need has zero counts, we approximate it by backing off to the (N-1)-gram.  We continue backing off  until we reach a history that has some counts. In order for a backoff  model to give a correct  probability  distribution,  we have to discount  the higher-order  n-grams  to save some  probability  mass for  the lower order n-grams.  Just as with add-one  smoothing,  if  the higher-order  n-grams  aren't discounted and we just used the undiscounted  MLE probability,  then as soon as we replaced an n-gram which has zero probability with a lower-order n-gram, we would be adding probability  mass, and the total probability assigned to all possible strings by the language model would be greater than 1! In addition to this explicit discount factor, we'll need a function  n  to distribute this probability  mass to the lower order n-grams. This kind of backoff with discounting is also called Katz backoff.  In Katz backoff  we rely on a discounted  probability  P*  if we've seen this n-gram before (i.e., if we have non-zero counts).  Otherwise, we recursively  back off to the Katz probability for the shorter-history (N-1)-gram. Katz backoff  is often combined  with a smoothing  method called Good-Turing. The combined Good-Turing backoff algorithm involves quite detailed computation for estimating the Good-Turing smoothing and the P* and alpha values.

3.5 Kneser-Ney
One of  the most commonly  used  and  best performing  n-gram  smoothing  methods is the interpolated  Kneser-Ney  algorithm  (Kneser and Ney 1995, Chen and Goodman 1998). Kneser-Ney  has its roots in a method called absolute discounting.  Recall that discounting of the counts for frequent n-grams is necessary to save some probability mass for the smoothing algorithm to distribute to the unseen n-grams. To see this,  we can  use a clever idea from  Church  and  Gale (1991).  Consider an n-gram that has count 4.  We need  to discount this count by some amount.  But how  much  should  we discount it?  Church  and  Gale's  clever idea was  to look at a held-out  corpus  and just see what  the count is for all those  bigrams  that had count 4 in the training  set.  They  computed  a bigram grammar from 22 million  words of AP newswire  and  then checked  the counts  of  each  of  these bigrams  in  another  22 million  words.   On  average,  a bigram  that occurred  4 times  in  the first  22 million words occurred  3.23 times in the next 22 million  words.  Fig. 3.8 from Church and Gale (1991) shows these counts for bigrams with c from 0 to 9. Notice  in Fig. 3.8 that except for the held-out  counts for 0 and 1, all the other bigram counts in the held-out set could be estimated  pretty  well by just subtracting 0.75 from the count in the training set!  Absolute discounting formalizes  this intuition by subtracting a fixed (absolute)  discount d  from each count.  The intuition  is that since we have good estimates already for the very high counts, a small discount d  won't affect  them much.  It will mainly  modify  the smaller counts, for which we don't necessarily trust the estimate anyway, and Fig. 3.8 suggests that in practice this discount is actually  a good one for bigrams  with counts 2 through 9. In the equation for interpolated absolute discounting applied to bigrams, the first term is the discounted bigram, and the second term is the unigram with an interpolation weight lambda.  We could just set all the d values to .75, or we could keep a separate discount value of 0.5 for the bigrams with counts of 1. Kneser-Ney  discounting  (Kneser and  Ney, 1995) augments  absolute discounting  with  a more sophisticated  way  to handle  the lower-order  unigram  distribution. Consider the job of predicting the next word in this sentence, assuming we are interpolating a bigram and a unigram  model: “I can't see without my reading”. The  word  “glasses”  seems  much  more  likely  to follow  here than,  say,  the  word Kong, so we'd like our unigram model  to prefer glasses. But in fact it's Kong that is more common, since Hong Kong is a very frequent word. A standard unigram model will  assign  Kong  a  higher  probability  than  glasses.  We  would  like  to capture  the intuition that although Kong is frequent, it is mainly only frequent in the phrase Hong Kong, that is, after the word Hong. The word glasses has a much wider distribution. In  other  words,  instead  of  P(w),  which  answers  the  question  “How likely  is w?”, we'd like to create a unigram model which answers the question “How likely is w to appear as a novel continuation?”. How can  we estimate this probability  of seeing the word w as a novel continuation,  in a new unseen context? The Kneser-Ney intuition is to base our estimate of P on the number of different contexts  word  w has appeared  in, that is, the number of bigram types it completes.  Every bigram type was a novel continuation the first time it was seen.  We hypothesize  that words  that have appeared  in more contexts in  the past are more likely to appear in some new context as well. To  turn  this  count  into  a  probability,  we  normalize  by  the  total  number  of  word bigram types. An equivalent formulation based on a different metaphor is to use the number of word types seen to precede w normalized  by the number of words preceding all words. A frequent  word  (Kong)  occurring in only one context  (Hong)  will  have a low continuation probability. The final equation for Interpolated Kneser-Ney smoothing for bigrams is then: (3.35). The  lambda is a normalizing  constant  that  is  used to distribute  the  probability  mass we've discounted. The  first  term, d is the  normalized  discount.   The  second  term is the number of word types that can follow  wi-1 or, equivalently, the number of word types that we discounted; in other words, the number of times we applied the normalized discount. The general recursive formulation is as follows: where  the  definition  of  the  count  cKN depends  on  whether  we  are  counting  the highest-order n-gram being interpolated (for example trigram if we are interpolating trigram, bigram, and unigram) or one of the lower-order n-grams (bigram or unigram if we are interpolating trigram, bigram, and unigram). The continuation count is the number of unique single word contexts. At the termination  of  the recursion,  unigrams are interpolated  with  the uniform distribution, where the parameter epsilon is the empty string: (3.39). If we want to include an unknown word <UNK>, it's just included as a regular vocabulary entry with count zero, and hence its probability  will be a lambda-weighted uniform distribution. The best performing version of Kneser-Ney smoothing is called modified Kneser-Ney smoothing, and is due to Chen and Goodman (1998).  Rather than use a single fixed  discount  d, modified  Kneser-Ney  uses  three  different  discounts  d1, d2 and d3+  for n-grams  with counts of 1, 2 and three or more, respectively.  See Chen and Goodman (1998, p. 19) or Heafield et al. (2013) for the details.

3.6    Huge Language Models and Stupid Backoff
By  using  text  from  the  web  or  other  enormous  collections,  it  is  possible  to  build extremely  large  language  models.   The  Web  1 Trillion  5-gram  corpus  released  by Google includes  various  large sets of  n-grams,  including 1-grams through  5-grams from  all  the five-word  sequences  that  appear  in  at  least  40  distinct  books  from 1,024,908,267,229 words  of  text  from  publicly  accessible  Web  pages  in  English (Franz and Brants,  2006).   Google  has  also  released  Google  Books  Ngrams  corpora with n-grams drawn from their book collections, including another 800 billion tokens of n-grams from Chinese, English, French, German, Hebrew, Italian, Rus- sian, and Spanish (Lin et al., 2012). Smaller but more carefully curated n-gram corpora for English include the million  most frequent  n-grams drawn from the COCA (Corpus  of  Contemporary  American  English)  1  billion  word  corpus  of  American English  (Davies,  2020).  COCA is a balanced  corpora,  meaning  that it has roughly equal numbers of words from different genres:  web, newspapers,  spoken conversation transcripts,  fiction,  and so on, drawn  from  the  period  1990-2019,  and  has  the context of each n-gram as well as labels for genre and provenance). Efficiency considerations are important when building language models that use such large sets of  n-grams.  Rather  than store each  word  as a string, it is generally represented  in memory  as a 64-bit hash  number,  with  the words  themselves  stored on disk.  Probabilities  are generally quantized using only 4-8 bits (instead of 8-byte floats), and n-grams are stored in reverse tries. N-grams can also be shrunk by pruning, for example only storing n-grams with counts  greater  than some threshold  (such  as the count  threshold  of  40 used for the Google n-gram  release) or using entropy  to prune less-important n-grams (Stolcke, 1998). Another  option  is to build  approximate  language  models  using  techniques like  Bloom  filters  (Talbot  and  Osborne  2007,  Church  et  al.  2007).   Finally,  efficient language model toolkits like KenLM (Heafield 2011, Heafield et al. 2013) use sorted  arrays,  efficiently  combine  probabilities  and  backoffs  in a single  value,  and use  merge  sorts  to efficiently  build  the  probability  tables  in  a minimal  number  of passes through a large corpus. Although  with  these toolkits it is possible  to build  web-scale  language  models using full Kneser-Ney  smoothing, Brants et al. (2007) show that with very large language models a much simpler algorithm  may be sufficient.  The algorithm  is called stupid  backoff.   Stupid  backoff gives  up the idea  of  trying  to  make  the language model  a  true  probability  distribution. There  is no  discounting  of  the  higher-order probabilities.   If  a  higher-order  n-gram  has  a  zero  count,  we simply  backoff  to  a lower order  n-gram,  weighed  by  a fixed  (context-independent) weight.   This algorithm does not produce a probability distribution. The backoff terminates in the unigram, which has probability S(w). Brants et al. (2007) find that a value of 0.4 worked well for lambda.

3.7    Advanced:  Perplexity's Relation to Entropy
We introduced  perplexity  in Section  3.2.1  as a  way  to evaluate  n-gram  models  on a  test  set.   A  better  n-gram  model  is  one  that  assigns  a  higher  probability  to  the test  data,  and  perplexity  is  a  normalized  version  of  the  probability  of  the  test  set. The  perplexity  measure  actually  arises  from  the  information-theoretic  concept  of cross-entropy,  which  explains  otherwise  mysterious  properties  of  perplexity  (why the inverse probability, for example?)  and its relationship  to entropy.  Entropy is a measure of information.  Given  a random  variable X ranging over whatever  we are predicting  (words, letters, parts of speech, the set of  which we'll call chi)  and with a particular probability function, call it  p(x), the entropy of the random variable X is: (3.41). The  log can,  in  principle,  be computed  in  any  base.  If  we use log  base 2,  the resulting value of entropy will be measured in bits. One intuitive  way  to think  about  entropy is as a lower bound on the number of bits it would take to encode a certain decision or piece of information in the optimal coding scheme. Consider an example from the standard  information  theory textbook  Cover and Thomas  (1991). Imagine  that  we  want  to place  a bet on a horse  race but it is too far to go all the way to Yonkers Racetrack,  so we'd like to send a short message to the bookie to tell him which of the eight horses to bet on.  One way  to encode  this message is just to use the binary  representation of  the horse's  number  as the code; thus, horse 1 would be 881, horse 2 818, horse 3 811, and so on, with horse 8 coded as 888.  If  we spend  the whole day betting and each horse is coded with 3 bits, on average we would be sending 3 bits per race. Can we do better?  Suppose that the spread is the actual distribution  of  the bets placed and that we represent it as the prior probability of each horse. The entropy  of  the random  variable X that ranges over horses gives us a lower bound on the number of bits. A code that averages 2 bits per race can be built with short encodings for more probable  horses, and  longer encodings  for  less  probable  horses.  For example,  we could encode the most likely horse with the code 0, and the remaining horses as 10, then 110, 1110,  111100,  111101,  111110, and 111111. What if  the horses are equally  likely?  We saw above that if  we used an equal-length  binary  code  for  the  horse  numbers,  each  horse  took  3 bits  to  code,  so  the average  was  3.  Is  the  entropy  the  same?   In  this  case  each  horse  would  have  a probability of 1/8. The entropy of the choice of horses is then 3 bits. Until now we have been computing  the entropy of a single variable. But most of what  we will use entropy for involves  sequences.  For a grammar, for example,  we will be computing the entropy of some sequence of words W = {w0, w1, w2, …, wn}. One way  to do this is to have a variable that  ranges over sequences  of  words.  For example we can compute the entropy of a random variable that ranges over all finite sequences of words of length n in some language  L. We could define the entropy rate (we could also think of this as the per-word entropy) as the entropy of this sequence divided by the number of words. But to measure the true entropy of a language, we need to consider sequences of infinite  length. The Shannon-McMillan-Breiman theorem  (Algoet  and Cover 1988, Cover and Thomas 1991) states that if the language is regular in certain ways (to be exact, if it is both stationary  and ergodic), (3.47). That is, we can take a single sequence that is long enough instead  of  summing over all possible sequences.  The intuition  of  the Shannon-McMillan-Breiman theorem is that a long-enough sequence of words will contain  in it many other shorter sequences  and  that each  of  these  shorter  sequences  will  reoccur  in  the longer  sequence according  to their probabilities. A stochastic  process  is said  to be stationary if  the probabilities  it assigns  to a sequence  are invariant  with  respect  to shifts in the time index.  In other words,  the probability distribution for words at time t is the same as the probability distribution at time t+1.  Markov  models,  and  hence  n-grams,  are stationary.  For example,  in a bigram,  Pi is dependent  only  on  Pi-1.  So if  we shift our time index  by x,  Pi+x  is still dependent  on Pi+x-1.  But natural language is not stationary, since as we show in Chapter 12, the probability  of  upcoming  words can  be dependent  on events  that were arbitrarily  distant and  time dependent.  Thus,  our statistical  models  only  give an approximation  to the correct distributions and entropies of natural language. To summarize,  by  making  some  incorrect  but  convenient  simplifying  assumptions, we can compute the entropy of some stochastic process by taking a very long sample of the output and computing its average log probability. Now we are ready to introduce cross-entropy. The cross-entropy is useful when we  don't  know  the  actual  probability  distribution   p  that  generated  some  data.   It allows us to use some m, which is a model  of  p (i.e., an approximation  to  p).  The cross-entropy of m on  p is defined by drawing sequences according to the probability  distribution  p, but summing the log of  their probabilities according to m. Again, following  the Shannon-McMillan-Breiman theorem, for a stationary  ergodic process,  we can estimate  the cross-entropy  of  a model m on some distribution  y by taking a single sequence  that is long enough instead of summing over all possible sequences. What makes the cross-entropy  useful is that the cross-entropy  H(p,m) is an upper bound on the entropy H(p). This means that we can use some simplified model m to help estimate the true entropy of a sequence of symbols drawn according to probability y. The more accurate m is, the closer the cross-entropy  H(p, m)  will be to the true entropy  H(p).  Thus, the difference between H(p, m) and H(p) is a measure of how accurate a model is. Between two models  m1 and m2, the more accurate model  will be the one with the lower cross-entropy. (The cross-entropy  can never be lower than the true entropy, so a model cannot err by underestimating the true entropy.) We  are  finally  ready  to  see  the  relation  between  perplexity  and  cross-entropy as we saw it in Eq. 3.49.  Cross-entropy  is defined in the limit as the length  of  the observed  word sequence goes to infinity.  We will need an approximation  to cross-entropy,  relying on a (sufficiently  long) sequence of fixed length. The perplexity of a model  P on a sequence of words W is now formally defined as the exp of this cross-entropy.

3.8    Summary
This chapter introduced language modeling and the n-gram, one of the most widely used tools in language processing. Language  models  offer  a  way  to  assign  a probability  to  a sentence  or other sequence of words, and to predict a word from preceding words. n-grams are Markov models  that estimate words from a fixed window of previous  words. n-gram probabilities  can  be estimated  by counting  in a corpus and normalizing (the maximum likelihood estimate). n-gram language models are evaluated extrinsically  in some task, or intrinsically using perplexity. The perplexity  of  a test set according  to a language  model  is the geometric mean of the inverse test set probability computed by the model. Smoothing algorithms provide a more sophisticated way to estimate the probability of n-grams. Commonly used smoothing algorithms for n-grams rely on lower-order n-gram counts through backoff or interpolation. Both backoff and interpolation require discounting to create a probability distribution. Kneser-Ney  smoothing makes use of the probability of a word being a novel continuation. The interpolated  Kneser-Ney  smoothing  algorithm  mixes  a discounted probability  with a lower-order continuation  probability.